[Music]
hi welcome to conversations I'm bill
kristol and I'm joined by my friend Jack
Goldsmith professor of law at Harvard
former senior Justice Department
official in the George W Bush
administration author of many books
articles many important contributions to
constitutional law and thinking about
the executive branch we've discussed
some of that on in our previous
conversations to discuss cybersecurity
which you've become a expert on and are
worried about your students worry just
that our previous conversation worried
oh great
we've had another conversation about
that soon but today I wanted to discuss
this terrific book or at least begin
from this terrific book you published a
couple of months ago what do I guess and
lay the fall of 2019 in hafez shadow
stepfather a disappearance in Detroit
and my search for the truth I would not
have associated you with Jimmy Hoffa but
I mean so tell me what's that about so
when I was 12 years old
I was living in West Memphis Arkansas
and my mom married a man who had
actually been she had been dating for
six months his name was Charles Chuckie
O'Brien and this is my third father my
second stepfather and he was a wonderful
stepfather and I didn't know much about
him he just kind of came from nowhere
six weeks after my mom married him when
is this tattwas sorry this is june of
nineteen they got married June 16th 1975
I was 12 years old
six weeks later on July 30th 1975 Jimmy
Hoffa disappeared from a parking lot in
suburban Detroit and our younger viewers
may not remember Jimmy Hoffa office so
Jimmy Hoffa is was in the 1950s and 60s
by far the most important and well-known
and consequential labor leader in the
United States this was the time when
labor unions were actually quite
important to an American Society in
American politics he raised the
president from 1957 on of the Teamsters
Union which was the largest union in the
country it ran basically with truckers
and warehouse workers and that meant
that he controlled the national economy
because he could bring the economy to a
standstill with the snap of his fingers
because if he's the truck stop the
economy stops see he was a
very very important and as I explained
in the book he was really quite a
brilliant labor bargain or organizer
labor leader hugely successful at
bringing Teamsters union members into
the middle class that was the good side
of Hoffa the bad side of Hoffa was that
he was corrupt by any definition he
didn't care about the law firm from his
times on picket lines in the 1930s and
he was getting his head bashed in by
cops and employers he came to disrespect
the law and legal institutions he
starting in the 40s developed
relationship with mobsters earth across
the country some of which were in the
Teamsters he spent a lot of times giving
out money from the teachers pension fund
to mobsters to build Vegas among other
things so Hoffa was this figure who was
a great labor leader but also crumped
guy he had gone to jail in 1967 he got
out of jail in 71 and he was trying to
get his Union back when he disappeared
in 1975 almost certainly at the behest
of the mob who didn't want him to get
his Union back so that in a nutshell
who's who Jimmy Hoffa is meanwhile
you're as you say if just meanwhile I'm
your stepfathers so meanwhile I was in
July 30 1975 I was on a on a boat in
Arkansas fishing with my mom and
brothers my new stepfather was in
Detroit
packing up his belongings because we
were about to move to Florida as a
family to start our new lives there and
Jimmy Hoffa disappears and it turns out
that my new stepfather was Jimmy Hoffa's
longtime aide he had met Hoffa when he
was nine years old
they were intensely close many people
thought a lot of people believed the
conventional wisdom was is that Chucky
my stepfather was hafez illegitimate son
because of the way Hoffa treated him and
because of the way Chucky adored him and
did anything Hoffa asked for 20 or 25
years he was his right-hand man and
always at his side they had a falling
out just before Hoffa disappeared
because he left off it to marry my mom
and then most amazingly a few days after
the disappearance Chucky became the
leading suspect he was thought to be the
person who picked up Hoffa at this
restaurant and drove him to his killer
so from age 12 I got except through
Chucky caught up in the whole Hoffa
disappearance Maelstrom which at the
time four people alive in the 70s was a
huge deal I mean it was front-page news
for days and days weeks and weeks on the
evening news every night every little
development the investigation was a
circus and we were really in the middle
of it there must have been pretty crazy
and you had no previous I mean
connection with any of this no I was you
know no I mean this came out of nowhere
in our lives we were living this
ordinary life in Tennessee in Arkansas
in Florida we also had lived for a while
my mom had a couple of failed marriages
but other than that it was a pretty
sedate life and then all of a sudden
there's this other world of mobsters and
labor union officials and Jimmy Hoffa's
disappearance so walk through a little
bit what happens over the next several
years so to cut two things three things
happened so I was 12 years old and
basically from 75 to 80 was my high
school years and basically three three
important events I as I see it happen
one as I grow very close to Chucky this
was a guy who wasn't highly educated but
he was full of love and he gave me love
and attention and support and stability
my mom was very sick so I became very
close to him I absorbed his worldview
including my attitude toward I love the
Teamsters Union and I thought the team
visions were the greatest we used to go
to these conventions and I met all the
senior executive officials all of whom
eventually went to jail
all of whom were corrupt I later learned
but they seemed like great guys to me I
became very close with several senior
mobster figures
Anthony Jacqueline II and Anthony
provenzano probably the two masterminds
of the Hoffa disappearance were my uncle
Tony's uncles Tony so that was so one
theme was I became absorbed into
Chucky's world the other theme was the
Hoffa disappearance investigation it was
just totally overwhelmed our family he
was aggressively harassed by the FBI
understandably they thought he was the
person who picked off up they had good
circumstantial reasons at the time for
thinking that he went to jail for a year
in 79 on an unrelated charge trying to
pressure him into talking about what he
knew
so those are the two forces for the next
during my teenage years basically and
what was alike having I mean you knew
these people were sort of Bob stirs or
not really you just thought they were
sort of well I read I read the
newspapers and this might this might
seem hard to believe but I was you know
the teenager I was in love with this man
and he just thought he was the greatest
I knew what the paper said about them
but my experience of them was that they
were they're these upstanding
well-dressed gentlemen and they were
respectful they were they showed me love
and affection they did me favors and
they were my new stepfathers uncles
so to speak not real uncle's but that's
how he referred to them and so they were
really part of my family and I kind of
absorb Chucky's world view his view at
the time or not his view but what he
told me was mafia is all BS it doesn't
exist that's a government plot to try to
harass the Italians and to the extent I
thought about it at me I didn't I kind
of believed him mm-hm I didn't think
about it very much right it wasn't
necessary for you to do so in my life
and and so but he never and he never
brought you into any of this obviously
no I mean he wasn't so just to be clear
he was not a member of the Mafia he's
half Irish half Sicilian he was never a
made man so he was close to these
officials these he was very close to the
mob because of his mother his Mikey's
mother Sylvia Pagano who I think is one
of the most interesting people in the
book she came from in a Sicilian crime
family in the Sicilian crime family in
Kansas City and she went to Detroit it's
with Chuckie at a young age and his
father was Irish but he left it when
Chucky was young and Sylvia was this
very consequential person in him off she
knew everyone and top guys in the
country and she knew Hoffa really well
she was actually the person Chucky's
mother who introduced Hoffa to the mob
in 1941
so Chucky learned and met all these
figures through his mother and also
later because he became a messenger from
Hoffa to all these mob figures mostly
about pension funds loans in the
so he was right in the middle of it
because of his association with Hoffa
and because of his mom's friends and his
mom was around when you were his mom I
actually knew his mom but the reason
this is it's complicated
I knew Chucky's mom before I knew
Chuckie because my grandmother and
Chucky's mom accidentally met at Miami
Beach and that's how my mom met Chucky
so I so I actually knew Chucky's mom so
that's how that whole thing got together
but he was and not a member of the Mafia
but he was close associate and and she
you just reviewed it she was just her
said your stepfathers muhammad's I said
brother's mom and she actually she
actually had died I knew her earlier she
died before my mom I never Eddie when I
was really young anyway he was she was
the consequential person to bring Chucky
to the mob and to bring Hoffa through
the mob so you go through high school
with your stepfather being in jail for a
year and begin the newspaper versus huge
suspect right and you believing that
wasn't the case right I basically
believed him when he said I mean he was
always very insistent he tried to he was
the only person who spoke to the other
suspects who spoke to the FBI to try to
clear his name he was the only suspect
to went on television to try to deny it
he was terrible at it
he was just he's not well-spoken and he
just didn't do a good job and he made
himself look worse every time he tried
but I believed him because he always
spoke about Hoffa in the most
reverential terms Hoffa was like a
father to him okay is it then what
happens next step is I go to college in
law school and I start to rethink my
relationship with Chucky first thing is
I get to college and I started reading
some of the books that have recently
come out about the Hoffa disappearance
and it turns out that the Mafia does
exist it turns out the my uncle's Tony
are violent men who were top mobsters it
turns out that Chucky has an association
with them and a criminal background that
I didn't know about and it turns out
that there's a lot of circumstantial
evidence that he drove off it to his
death although as I later say in the
book it doesn't hold up
so I started starting to rethink him
along those grounds I started to think
worried about the impact of these
relationships on my own life there was
one day when a really thuggish
repo guy comes and took away of kind of
violently the car Chucky had given me
because he didn't make the payments on
it I wasn't paying attention so I
started to wonder about whether maybe
this would impact my life or the weather
I was in danger and then especially as I
started to think about law school also
kind of grew I'm embarrassed by what am
I telling you now because it wasn't
where were you in college I was at
Washington University and I started to
grow embarrassed about Chucky I used to
revel and his Indian identity when I was
a teenager but when he came to Debbie
Nell and you know we were all in coat
and tie and went to a play and he was
ill dressed wearing his Teamsters jacket
it was out of place and I just grew
embarrassed about him he didn't speak
very well with my professors whom I
admired and then I started to think
about my career I got into Yale Law
School and when I got to law school I
started to think you know whatever I
might want to do in my legal career it's
this Association is not going to be good
for me so for a whole bunch of reasons
by the time I got to law school I
basically cut him out of my life so I'd
gone from adoring this man and he was
like the solid rock in my life to
essentially cutting him out of my life
six or seven years later so not
something I'm proud of but that's what I
did
understandable though is probably
understandable but not necessarily
justified and then he goes on with his
life and he goes on with his life you
become a law clerk and a lawyer at all
this I go through my career at every
stage of my career and actually at every
stage of my career in the government
when I had to get a security clearance
it was it turned out to be very
important that I had distanced myself
from Chuckie this happened the year
after law school I was clerking for J
wilkinson and he assigned me to actually
in Iran Contra case as I needed to get a
secret security clearance and when I
filled out the forms about my alias as
the other names I had had and my my
stepfather's I put down Charles O'Brian
I didn't say Charles O Brien , the
leading suspect in the half a
disappearance I just said Charles
O'Brien the FBI figured it out I got all
the documents so they kind of had this
panicked reaction oh this guy he's
trying to get a clearance and this guy
might know stuff so the FBI came down to
Charlottesville and spent I spent a long
long day in which they grilled me about
it
I knew about every monster I've ever
seen what their apartments looked like
what my relationship with Chucky was at
the end of that after I tossed Jacky
under the bus I got my clearance and
every step of my career in government
when I needed a security clearance this
came up so basically over the next 20
years and it is hard to convey I think
to young people today how big a deal the
Hoffa disappearance was I mean it was so
the unsolved
it was galling to the FBI right if they
couldn't there were two yes exactly
that's a very important point this was
this probably the greatest one of the
greatest unsolved crimes in American
history certainly the greatest unsolved
crime that the FBI has ever expended
this level of resources on but it wasn't
just the Hoffa disappearance they were
also by that point they were really
interested in in getting the mob and
killing them all so they had access to
someone who kind of knew these families
I didn't know a lot but I grew up with
them so I was an interesting figure for
them and they were all so I think
worried with could I be blackmailed if I
was given national security information
on the like so my career progresses for
the next 15 years I don't talk to Chucky
I'm just out of touch with him I don't
see him don't think about him and I you
know have this fairly successful career
in the law and I end up being you know
in my last government job I was the
assistant attorney general in charge of
the office of legal counsel where again
the security clearance issue I mean it
came up there he game came up by that
point I had so distanced myself that it
wasn't even an issue so that's basically
takes us up through my time as in the
government as I recall from the
beginning of the book though as you're
mostly what you've read about elsewhere
very interesting Lee engaged in this
very very difficult judgments about the
legality of the various post 9/11
programs and you're involved in huge
fights Bush administration which you've
written about elsewhere but you also
encounter this your past a night rage so
this was I opened the book with this
episode and it was really it was really
just an amazing moment in my life and if
the event that I'm about to describe
that caused me to start rethinking my
relationship with Chucky so I was
working on the stellarwind warrantless
wiretapping program a warrantless
surveillance program and which was the
big Bush
counterterrorism program after 9/11 lots
of collects in the homeland as soon as I
got there was apparent that there were
large legal problems with the program
for a whole bunch of reasons that were
factual problems way it was described so
I'm working on this late one night I had
a day job to run OLC and at nighttime
I'm trying to figure out this program
that I'm charged with signing off on the
legality of which so the assistant
general for legal counsel signs off
every six weeks this program had to be
approved by the Attorney General and
that meant that it had to be approved by
OLC and then the Attorney General would
accept no Elsie's advice and your
predecessor had approved it had approved
it and had approved it every six weeks
for two and a half years so but it was
hugely flawed from top to bottom and as
is widely acknowledged now this wasn't
just my idiosyncratic view of the
program so I'm working late one night in
December of 2003 in the Justice
Department and very stressed out because
the threat reports at the time were as
severe as they had been since 9/11 and
Here I am monkeying around with the most
important counterintelligence program
and the government the one that they say
is keeping us safe people are gonna die
if we cut back on this it was enormous
Lee legally complicated so the whole
thing was just unprecedented and
stressful and in the midst of that
stress I'm reading a Fourth Amendment
case in the 60s trying to educate myself
about the history of the Fourth
Amendment better than I had been
educated and I stumble across these two
citations in in this opinion it was a
citation to Hoffa versus United States
and O'Brien versus United States and
both of those cases so it was a the
O'Brien case Chuckie had actually told
me about when I was a kid it was my
stepfather's case he had told me about
all the shortcuts and illegalities that
bobby kennedy took against him so just
to go back for a second Bobby Kennedy
had this extraordinarily aggressive many
people described as a vendetta against
Hoffa pursuing him in the 50s right as
the chief counsel for the Intelligence
Committee and then as Attorney General
very very aggressive to put Hoffa away
and there are always rumors and Chucky
had always said that they that in
suing Hoffa that Kennedy had broken the
law and cut corners she called it back
up the government's ability to enforce
the law against others but when it comes
to complying with the law itself because
they're in secret they can interpret it
away or whatever and he also talked
about this famous Chucky did when I was
a kid about this famous Supreme Court
case that he won that showed that he was
being illegally bugged by Kennedy and
you know I didn't think about it much
and as a kid and I didn't think about it
in law school I didn't really believe it
because Chucky tended to be a
artist a lot of the time and Danny never
actually looked at the camera because it
wasn't it wasn't an important wouldn't
wouldn't the kind of case you would read
in law school wasn't an important case I
wasn't a Criminal Procedure scholar so I
didn't know about it so I printed it out
and it was exactly what Chucky said he
had been convicted in the early 60s of
stealing some stuff from a bonded
warehouse in Detroit which he claimed he
bet he bought didn't steal but he was
convicted of stealing it and it turned
out that he called Tony Giacalone II had
been bugged with this illegal bug by the
Kennedy administration there was
Hoover's FBI during the Kennedy
administration in the early 60s they had
overheard a conversation with Chuckie
and his lawyer and this was at a time in
the 60s when the the early round of
really aggressively illegal Hoover
surveillance had finally come out in the
60s and so the Supreme Court insisted
that Thurgood Marshall a Solicitor
General confess error and explain what's
going on and as part of that explanation
Chucky's case guy vacated he won the
case so everything he told me about that
case you know he wasn't a lawyer but
basically the way he described it was
true but more importantly the way he
described the Justice Department in the
early 60s was kind of where I was he
described the Justice Department in
early 60s as engaging in unlawful
surveillance cutting corners in secret
so that they could you know go after the
enemy within at the time it's as my
words not him but that's the way that's
what he had in mind and here I was
thinking about Chucky for the first time
in 20 years and hearing what he used to
say to me and seeing that it kind of
applied to what I was doing I was in the
middle of something very very similar
and so I wouldn't it's definitely not
the case that I immediately changed my
mind about Chucky but that was the event
that started me too on the path to
reconsidering my relationship with him
and ultimately asking for his
forgiveness for basically blowing him
off for 20 years so just to finish that
part of the story then we can come back
to the legal side and also the sort of
judgment about offered all this and so
you reconcile with with your stepfather
and spent a lot of time with him over
the next I did years right
so we reconciled the next year I my wife
helped me encourage me to do this and I
began to think he wasn't doing well he
was sick I had my own children by this
point and I came to realize in a way
that I didn't before then just how
devastating what I had done to him was
that I mean we were very close I changed
my name I was Jack O'Brien from age 13
to 21 he was very proud of that I
changed my name from O'Brien to
Goldsmith my birth name which really
upset him a lot and I never really
appreciated how much I hurt him until I
had my own children my mom had always
told me how much I hurt him he wrote me
this extraordinary letter that basically
made clear how hurt he was but it wasn't
till I had my own kids and started
thinking about being in his situation
and that happening to me that it really
hit home so they robbed a logger she
still lives just so that's she's still
alive and so as I was visiting them for
the first time really the second time
but the first time we had ever been nice
to him in 20 years and I asked for
forgiveness one night and he was
extremely sweet and he looked at me in
kind of watery eyes he was surprised and
he said you don't have to apologize son
I understand why you did what you did
and that was it and there would be we
grew closer over the next several years
and ultimately and growing close again
it was obviously a different kind of
closeness at a different stage in our
lives
we started talking about Hoffa and he
started telling me more and I without
before I did any research I came to
think that he actually probably wasn't
involved in it and there was an
interesting story there and I knew I
could write a story that we gave him a
fair shake than history did because I
really want to emphasize from 1975 until
this day he is the conventional wisdom
as he's the person that picked up
Hoffman drove him to his death the new
Scorsese movie has Chucky in the car
picking
I've been driving him to his death
that's the conventional wisdom knowingly
or unknowingly so unwittingly
unwittingly is the way it was told in
the original FBI theory in the 70s
probably I'm wittingly and that's the
way Scorsese apparently plays it so
we've grew close and I decided to write
a book and it took me seven years of
really unbelievable hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of hours research
with him he was a very difficult
research subject he's a famous skirt or
of the truth he's committed to America
so he there were things he didn't want
to tell me about and yet even after
people are dead
everybody everybody that it wasn't that
became very clear that it wasn't about
his self-preservation it was about his
honor this is one of the things I
learned about that he was committed to
this principle of not talking because it
was just it was his kind of foundational
principle that he learned from his mom
and Anthony jackal Ernie
so that was one large sort of tension in
her in this relation that tension but it
was ever-present and yet he really
pushed himself hard and told me a lot
about what he knew about the run-up to
the disappearance gave me information
that made quite clear he wasn't involved
and he told me some things that he
actually later regretted he went a
little too far but in any event we grew
very close and I spent seven years
working this book I talked to every FBI
agent who ever worked the case is so
alive about a dozen of them actually
became very good friends with all these
FBI guys we used the original agents on
the case and I've met probably fifteen
times they're great guys amazing I mean
really just extraordinarily
extraordinary agents is kind of the best
representatives of the bureau I've ever
I've ever met and I looked at all sorts
of documents I got my hands on document
said no one's ever seen and to that
that's what I did and basically I mean
what the main thing I set out to do in
the book was to see if Chucky was guilty
or innocent and I'm I think that I
proved that he did not do it everyone
who's read the book says I did but most
importantly I came to learn that the FBI
no longer thinks he did it it's so
they've unbeknownst to the public
because this the 1970s narrative has
continued unbeknownst to the public
the bureau has not believed Chucky was
involved in the hoff the disappearance
for 20 years it was so interesting what
the book is and that's in a way that's
interesting and important it's sort of
it's one rep well we now our conclusion
about one person a very special person
for you and for me but not for an
interesting phenomena most once you read
the book but you get to know him of
course and all this but more broadly I'm
just the way even said about Americas so
interesting I mean what did you learn
about that whole world that you would
suggest yeah so Chucky is several things
first of all again to repeat Chuck he's
not a made man right so he did not have
a blood oath to keep this but it's as if
he did and because he's half Irish half
Sicilian but he was basically Sicilian
and the two people that he admired the
absolute most in the world besides Jimmy
Hoffa were his mother and Anthony
Giacalone II and this is something that
they drilled into him from literally for
me as a young boy and he talked about
this he talked to me about this in the
book and he had a genuine admiration for
the old guys as he put it the senior mob
figure especially the Alzheimer's as he
put it so he was completely captured by
the mob culture and he believed it and
it was important to it to him and he
valued it so it just wasn't for him
America nots basically not speaking
about things you're not supposed to
speak about not telling tales about what
you saw as he put it it was just a
foundational principle of his identity
it really was and I said when I started
off the book it started these
conversations it was frustrating and I
thought kind of to myself self-serving
opportunistic crime hiding and it was
all of those things I mean that's
basically what his point was but over
time and by the end I actually came to
admire his commitment to it because his
in a strange way I mean I want to
qualify this carefully in a way he his
whole life was ruined and he gave up
everything to kind of preserved that
principle he could have cleared himself
by talking about a whole bunch of things
that he knew about that some of which he
told me some of which he could have told
the government he could have done this
after all these people died he just
thought it was the wrong thing to do
and towards the end of our conversations
you know I would ask him about the
disappearance and he would tell me a
certain amount and he would stop because
his mother's visit would appear in his
conscience and his head and after a
while I didn't want to press him anymore
because I felt like I was kind of
violating the one thing that they have
onto that was so important I refer to it
in the end of the book as during our
last conversation about this as I was in
all of his eccentric integrity and
that's what it was it is eccentric but
it was definitely piece of integrity and
so obviously I have mixed feelings about
it it's not my worldview obviously but
in fact mine is something of the
opposite I think but it was hugely
important for him and it he stuck to it
until the end yeah and not out of any
self-interest at that point or even out
of yeah just to go against self-interest
he could have if he had told me
everything he knew we could have sold a
lot more books and just for one thing
another thing he could have cleared
himself unambiguously had he told
everything he knew and he just it was
the wrong thing to do and he he would
talk about and not telling me he and I
would say you know everyone's dead what
difference does it make
and he would say but I know their
families and and he just said Jack I
just can't do it it's not right yeah
it's just not right I just can't do it
we had this Congress we had many
conversations about America it was that
was some of the most interesting
conversations we had yeah I can imagine
that is something like yeah so
interesting kind of the I'm it's such a
cliche almost that you know the mob has
its own code of honor and stuff but
still well the interesting thing is is
that it's actually broken down one of
the ways and it is not very powerful
anymore Chucky's very old-school and one
of the reasons the mob is not nearly as
powerful it used to be is because the
government has gotten people to break
and the reason they've gotten people to
break is because starting in the 70s and
80s the prison terms got very long and
when prison terms got very long people
started to talk and once the norm broke
down there was a lot of yapping I mean
there are now dozens of mob memoirs and
so it's actually kind of gone
but for Chucky it's real oh well what
else about that era and the spin those
that organization and those people know
the amazing things I learned a lot I
didn't know much about the history of
the mom I did a lot of work figuring out
that I would just a couple of things I
never realized how extraordinarily
powerful and wealthy and important to
the economy the mob was starting
basically after prohibition and
especially in the 30s 40s 50s and 60s we
don't know the numbers but it was in
they people speculate in the tens or
maybe hundreds of billions I mean it was
a lot of money and that they were making
in the aggregate and there was this and
the country really didn't know about it
till the 50s for the first 20 years
because of America I was serious then
there was it there was discussions even
Arthur Schlessinger Jr's book in the 60s
about late 60s about Bobby Kennedy when
he's talking about this he says there
are two views about the extent to which
the mob really exists so there was it
was this incredibly powerful successful
wealthy profit generating organization
throughout the country that really was
this kind of subversive underworld it
really was underworld so that the first
thing is just how extensive and when
doesn't become I can't I sort of vaguely
remember reading about this but when
does it really become known right entity
several events happened one the Kefauver
hearings in the early 50s were the first
ones to really but to bring national
attention to it the second big event was
in the late 50s in Appalachian New York
the New York cops stumbled onto a mob
convention and that was the event they
got Hoover interested Jagger Hoover the
Hoover had always either denied the mob
was an important force he didn't want to
get him he was afraid of a corrupt as if
his agents to to go there he thought it
was a local a local law problem not not
one that concerned him and then Bobby
Kennedy in the McClellan committee those
are the three big events that really got
to go in the 50s it became known and
then
on the waterfront it became part of the
culture before that there was a pretty
big argument I think among respectable
socially social scientists and
sociologists all that it's kind of a
myth you know there this local brew
right but there's not one right outfit
or you know organization there was a
little big debate about it even after
the 50s there was the extent of it was
still debated it was huge and it was
very powerful and it kind of in thena
for example it insinuated itself
throughout the Teamsters union which was
the most powerful union in the country
I mean Hoffa when he became president he
was dealing with the reality of mob
controlled unions around the country
which he couldn't fix he had no interest
in doing it but so one interesting part
of it was just how consequential they
were the second interesting thing I
learned is that Bobby Kennedy was sure
that decapitating often putting him in
jail would take care of the mob problem
and the Teamsters Union and he thought
in the country really and exactly the
opposite happened he when he got rid of
half the mob actually Hoffa
he didn't understand this kept the mob
at arm's length from the Teamsters money
and stuff Hoffa was in charge when Hoffa
went to jail the mob took over the
Teamsters Union then the third irony is
the mob knocked off and that was the
event that finally spurred the FBI when
they did you could see this in the
internal documents the FBI just eyes
opening in the Hoffa investigation this
uncovering all the labor racketeering
all the extensive control of the mob
throughout the country and that was the
event ironically the mob trying to kill
hava heba's mouth shut that led to their
downfall in the 70s and 80s they got
people like Rudy Giuliani going so
there's some interesting historical
oddities there about just amazing the
way you think of America in the 1560s
that all that Alger for in certain ways
and stuff that is not people forget just
how big a part that was of urban of life
urban life was dominated urban
government is a corruption of it and the
government and the cops were on the
payroll it was I mean I'm not in every
city and not after complete corruption
but it was pervasive in the better in
the big cities
New York Chicago Kansas City
Philadelphia Miami really all over the
country
it's it's I didn't know much about this
until I read the book and it's really
one of the most amazing things have I'm
now very interested in that in that
genre of book and and history yeah now
you read it when you read like mystery
novels and you know so all the noir
novels for the 50s are very into this of
course but one sort of vaguely assumes
it's just novelistic I don't think
overdone the cops on the take and you
know and but yeah and by the way so in
the and I really got the best glimpse of
this so I got access to these illegal
bugs that Hoover did in the late fifties
and early sixties of Uncle Tony
Giacalone II and Chucky's mom of their
office and apartment and these
conversations are amazing for many many
reasons just because the blatant
illegality of what the FBI was doing but
also just the extent of bribing this cop
paying off this judge you know it's all
there
and and and and all the matcha nations
of the mob and how they worked it's just
quite extraordinary and Hoover's FBI
just doesn't pay attention to it I mean
that's kind of I mean the league out no
what do you mean what they didn't say so
first they hand it off for the mob so
the first hands off the mob and then he
panics in the late 50s and the first
thing they decided to do was to start
placing bugs in these places and it's
technical legal stuff and I go to it in
the book but basically Hoover had been
getting legal sign-off for bugs from the
Justice Department going back to the 30s
all kind of problematic and not very
persuasive legal arguments but the step
from national security bugs so after the
mob was really just a terrible obviously
illegal step but he got it and it was
how they got up to speed very quickly
when you place a few bugs in the right
places there's this famous good but I'm
not gonna get the numbers right but that
one bug is worth I think a hundred
agents or maybe a thousand agents they
just they placed a bug in the
headquarters in Chicago that was the
first one and they just immediately got
the intelligence now the interesting
thing is they just used this for
intelligence collection they didn't use
it for bait they couldn't use it for
prosecution because it wouldn't have
been lawful the whole thing was illegal
so that's how they got up to speed on
the law very quickly by using these
illegal
microphones and it sounds just amazing
that you know every evidence this is
modern times
nice you said ready and it's American
government and it's Washington the
Washington of Dwight the Eisenhower and
UNF Kennedy and all these people right
and the cities of these fairly
well-known mayors and so forth and
there's both rampant illegality on the
part of the mob and a grandpa together
and part of the government just you know
it's true they feel better about things
today in a way right well things
actually on these fronts things are much
better today then the this system of
governmental control in perfect over
electronic surveillance is just
incomparable better now in part because
this event I mean this stuff leaked out
in the 60s we had a huge debate that
people have forgotten about in the 60s
about whether we can have microphone
surveillance in wiretap eventually
Congress enacted a law in 1968 that
authorized this stuff if you get a
judicial warrant that was a big deal and
so it was because in large part because
of the mob bugs that some of this reform
happened and that began and of course as
always happens when the government
accepts these legal constraints they're
hugely empowered because now they can do
it lawfully and they can use the
information in court and that's how they
eventually brought down the mall this is
a lesson that the executive branch never
learns that doing things unilaterally in
secret can bring you some short-term
advantage but if you really want to be
empowered by the techniques you need to
get the sign-off of the other branches
that's a lesson the Bush administration
had a hard time learning but it was a
lesson of the 60s as well as the same
lesson interesting yeah so you learned
about the mob what about unions there
was another I mean I became more
sympathetic over the course of my work
for private sector unions in part
because my own views are kind of
shifting about inequality in the country
and I had developed a view in law school
and at Chicago when I was going through
my blog on economics phase that unions
were just bad for all bunch of reasons
and also in my reaction against Chucky I
kind of formed a view against unions
even though I loved him as a kid
anything about to make a long story
short Hoffa is this magical figure and I
became enamored by him and
his first of all I understood what the
conditions were like in a way I didn't
really in the 30s and 40s and 50s and
the real serious improvements that Hoffa
made in people's lives and I saw how
unions when they work well can do that
no and that with a paradox about Hoffa
is that even though he was on the make
in certain respects he was 100%
committed to his union zero doubt about
that and in fact all the money he made
on the side and there were tens of
millions that he made on the side from
various things he was using to enhance
his power to help us Union and he would
also give it away to the guys in the
Union he was it a really an amazing guy
so I came to break a little bit of
Papa's worldview about the lowly worker
and came to see at least the idea of
unions I mean as they operate today it's
pretty pathetic the union leadership is
not in good shape I probably at the
private sector they've they're burdened
with laws and private sector unions in
this country right now are in terrible
shape but I came to be much more
sympathetic to the need for labor unions
properly understood and basically
studying off I helped me to understand
that interesting yeah unpredictable
consequences yes 104 consequence of this
project yeah it's funny I grew up you
know my New York I was Pro Union but the
Union heroes for these kind of risks of
the garment workers and right you offer
Auto Workers very prominent in the
Democratic Party mm-hmm Hoffa was always
kind of a black sheep among union
leaders for a lot of reasons yes there's
a lot of black sheep first of all the
Teamsters were the most Republican of
unions he they supported Nixon in 68
they poured supported Nixon in 72 I'm
pretty sure that Hoffa openly supported
Nixon and the 60s they were also the
most Hoffa was famously skeptical of the
welfare state because he was afraid it
would he said this one of his
biographies he worried that it would
take away the initiative of the working
man kind of a conservative idea and he
was very old-fashioned in his in his
values and had a kind of a weird streak
of conservatism I wouldn't call him a
full-blown political conservative by any
stretch but he was he was also he
believed
capitalism he just wanted to take
advantage of it for the workers
he was really against the left in unions
he thought that you know wacky comma
commies is what he called people like
Luther and others who were dominating
the union's at the time so one
interesting thing about Hoffa is that he
was this he was a black sheep also in
but in the unions because he didn't
really play by the union rules he didn't
really care about the Wagner Act and
stuff like that he had his own methods
for exercising union power
I came to watching Hoff operate seeing
how much he identified with the working
man seeing how he's reading his speeches
and understanding their plight b2b the
government and employers and really what
terrible situation they were in and
watching how he used these techniques to
you know get them dental care get them
health care get air conditions in the
cab's get power steering the initiative
getting a powers getting power steering
guaranteed and these trucking contracts
was a huge deal that affected the health
of these workers where was he from so he
was he was born in Indiana and southern
Indiana and he moved with his mom to
Detroit in the 20s she was looking for
better work that was the local he headed
up before going to Asheville yeah
local 299 well his first Union was he
was working in Kroger's in the middle of
the depression on the warehouse this is
a famous story and he worked for this
terrible boss who was a real terrible
guy it's office said the kind of guy who
makes unions and he was abusive and he
they were getting paid nothing they only
got paid for the time they worked that
sit around for hours so they basically
Hoffa organized at age 18 or 19 he was
basically the lead organizer of what was
a strike when the frozen strawberries
when the strawberries came iced off the
truck on a warm night the workers just
stopped working and the strawberries
started to wilt and Hoffa organized all
this and basically right away the
employer the boss capitulated to save
the strawberries and
Gracie recognized a union at a time when
unions were not really there hated so
that was that's how he got his start
it's more complicating that that's the
basic story and then he went to work for
local 299 in Detroit which is where his
home base was and from there he he
expanded his power basically in
concentric circles from Detroit he was a
remarkably successful organizing in the
south where nobody else because of the
right-to-work laws could organize Hoffa
circumvented all of these laws he didn't
use the laws he used economic pressure
basic he used
Ralph and Estelle James were two famous
labor economists in the 60s and they did
a study of hafez labor techniques and
they described them as ingenious and he
really was this uneducated genius I mean
he was he knew as Chucky described to me
he knew the trucking companies
executives better than they knew
themselves he understood trucking
economics better than do themselves
Chucky told me about he brought Hoffa to
a debate at Harvard once when I was two
years old it turned out and I got a tape
of the debate he was debating these
famous labor economists and he kind of
knocked him around because I didn't know
what they were talking about it was
really really smart you know in a kind
of plain-spoken way and but anyway he
used the ability to not ship goods
essentially and and and to threaten
various industries and that's how they
and they would just capitulate and he
was he was a genius at garnering and he
but to do this he had to centralize
power and himself so he was
controversial within the Teamsters
because the Teamsters Union itself was
too centralized so he centralized power
and himself and then he expanded his
power nationally right before he went to
jail he got a national trucking contract
the first of its kind there was a huge
event front page in The New York Times
and an historic labor agreement he was
just and he was just brilliant at what
he did on the labor side and by the way
despite all the criminality on the side
that's where he was 99% of the time and
all the criminality on the side for
Hoffa for him that was just doing
business in a way that he thought would
ultimately help the Union so he was
corrupt by any measure and a criminal by
any measure but he was also kind of a
Robin Hood figure you know it was raised
an issue aware the other and race was he
was very progressive on reused a big
memory alpha was deeply pragmatic he
Chucky said he would do business with
Hitler if he thought it would help his
members that was a quote from Hoffa that
Chucky told me he didn't like the
socialist left but he would work with
left-wing unions if you thought it would
help his Union he was very progressive
on race and gender equality in the Union
he had a lengthy correspondence with
Martin Luther King and because they kind
of identified with one another because
of surveillance by the government
oppression by the government but also
Hoffa thought there she wrote this
letter which I quote in the book he just
was very pragmatic we need to sign up
everyone and what he cared about was the
worker now he had to deal with racism
within his Union and that was tricky in
the south but he was very insistent and
he would send out directives all the
time about equality within the Union
racial and gender equality so he was
actually something of again this strange
guy is something of a progressive on
those matters much more progressive than
than the other law-abiding unions on
those issues amazing he's an amazing guy
yeah and there are biographies from him
obviously and but are they interesting
or is there's only one I would say
they're almost all the books on off are
terrible there's one good biography
pretty good biography called Hoffa by
what's-his-name I remember his name now
it's a it's pretty good I mean it's it's
a sympathetic biography and and it's
it's it's more technical about how he
did this and how he did that but it's a
pretty good house Sloan is his name it's
a pretty good biography I mean I learned
from it in writing my book yeah it's
such a major figure but I mean I mean I
remember I guess it wasn't like early
20s when he disappeared but somehow that
was the most famous thing about him I
again once he disappeared that became
the story and then it was so of course
mob-related right that some of he and
the mob got in inextricably linked in my
mind everybody was sight of all the way
everybody
even in labor even labor historians and
he never got credit for his
accomplishment he wasn't part of the
afl-cio is that right they came out they
kicked out the conversion in the 50s
because of their corruption so meanie
was at odds with law they love Hoffa was
on the outside there almost everybody
else in labor it sit for labor it was
kind of a tragedy because if the
Teamsters had economic power that they
could leverage if you had any strike in
any union you wanted the Teamsters on
your side because that they stopped
delivering goods or if they refused to
cross picket line then the company in
question just couldn't continue so it
was kind of a tragedy for labor that
Hoffa was on the outs with the rest of
Labor if they could have found a way to
work together which was practically
impossible labor would have been much
more powerful and by the way when labor
was declining started declining in the
late fifties or sixties that's when the
decline began the Teamsters were still
growing in power and so he was he
doesn't I go into this a bit in the book
because history has not given him enough
credit for his extraordinary
accomplishments they've been
overshadowed by his flaws Yeah right
look what about the government I mean so
you had you both encountered the
government and research in the people
for the government and research in the
book but also then of course learned
about what the government had been doing
back in that whole period so I'm pretty
sunny I mean I don't have any illusions
about the virtues and vices of the US
government or the executive branch or
the Justice Department of the FBI but I
feel like I'm pretty well aware of my
own experiences in my own studies before
this book about strengths and weaknesses
but I learned as I learned to mix story
about the government in this story a lot
of it a lot of the story I tell is a
story about government malfeasance
government malfeasance in the way they
went after Chucky and hobbits Hoffa
especially again Hoffa was serial
criminal but the way the government went
after him actually broke claws and
certainly broke ethical rules the
surveillance stuff was all completely
illegal as was acknowledged when it came
out in the 60s and then moving forward
to the 70s the Hoffa investigation
there were many reasons to go after to
suspect Chucky and so on the virtue side
the original agents on the case - in
Detroit one in New Jersey one in New
York I back at got to know very well and
these are men of absolute integrity and
they've been kind of on the case still
today I mean they spent so much time
together how trying to help each other
figure it out so these are like the best
representative of the bureau who you
know acted by the book and were just
great intelligent and faithful
government servants then at another time
a lot of the story I tell is about how
the government lied a lot about Chucky's
involvement they would leak things about
him trying to frame him or pressure men
to talking that I show in the documents
that were in the side of the government
at the same time were they exactly the
opposite of what they were thinking
there was a whole bunch of that and then
after they basically let the world think
that Chucky was the guy and to this day
the people think this because the FBI
accused him of this woman in the 70s
that Chucky was the guy who drove hopper
to his death they never did anything to
correct the record even though they knew
it was false and the final kind of
indignity I think was about five six
five or six years ago they invited
they've told Chucky that the FBI did in
Detroit and the US Attorney that the US
attorney that they believed he wasn't
involved they said they would give him a
letter of exoneration saying it's not a
target or subject to the investigation
they invited him to Detroit all you have
to do they said is to tell us the truth
about what you know and if you tell the
truth we'll give you this letter I got
this all in writing a lot of people
advised me not to do this Vice Chucky
not to do this because it was illegally
fraud thing if he had told a lie he
could have gone to jail there's all
sorts of legally problematic things and
the government people said they might
not give you the letter even though they
promised it we decided to go forward he
told the truth
they holida said he told the truth they
said after the interview that he told
the truth the letters to be forthcoming
and then the letter didn't come and it
didn't come and it stretched out for
eight or nine months and they finally
decided they weren't gonna do it and
they didn't do it because basically the
people at the top in Detroit didn't want
to take the heat after some other
embarrassment
about the Hoffa case for admitting that
publicly why should they admit that they
had the wrong guy so that was really
really disappointing for for him
especially but also for me so I learned
a lot about government malfeasance but
also you know good government it's a
mixed story as usual how reassured
should we be today that things are
better I mean in the in the FBI the
dozen generally that you know look the
FBI like any organization has a
strengths and weaknesses it's taken a
beating from this president that it
doesn't deserve it made mistakes along
the way as an inspector general reports
have shown I think the remarkable untold
story untold story but underappreciated
story I said this to you before about
the FBI and the Justice Department in
the Trump era is how much they have
maintained their norms of Independence
including political appointees despite
the president's truly unprecedented
attacks I mean whatever you think of
sessions and Rosenstein and Ray and
Muller these were people that Trump
attacked and people thought they would
cave you know a year ago or year and a
half ago people thought we're never
gonna see the mullet report probably
gonna fire Muller he's gonna clamp down
on the report despite all that pressure
he's owned appointees and the people in
the department stood up to it and that
went through the most remarkable thing
and this is not really about the justice
department it's about the norms of the
executive branch the most remarkable and
again I think underappreciated element
of the Muller report was in volume 2
when episode after episode of Trump
trying to get all of his people
political appointees close associates
even lackeys to try to help him obstruct
justice and none of them will do it it's
really I mean there's a story to be told
and again this is a story that I tell
that people don't appreciate but there's
a story to be told about the remarkable
resilience of norms in the face of
Trump's just truly outlandish and
unprecedented abusive actions yeah we're
having this conversation around
Thanksgiving and the of the impeachment
investigation focused on Ukraine is in
the news and they are - it's interesting
isn't that I mean
he has to go around the Foreign Service
yeah he has to go at his own ambassador
the ambassador Mike Pompeo asked to come
back to me to be an ambassador or charge
a bill Taylor right he has to go around
his own after majority counsel to try to
pull off this yeah you know deal
basically right but Giuliani's odd looks
out of you know using a political point
d out of his Lane and so forth but
Giuliani is the one person I mean this
is true of he tried to use his cronies
to sit down the Moller investigation to
get sessions to recuse and no one
listened to Giuliani is really the only
I know which is amazing I mean you know
Giuliani said in my book because he was
the one that brought down the Teamsters
put them in receivership back in the day
when the eighties when he was the great
man the great law enforcement guy and
how he has fallen he's the one guy who
basically blew off the norms and was
completely a lackey of the President as
far as I can tell probably had financial
interest to that maybe so probably I but
but it's the the Giuliani that the
Chuckie experienced in the 80s and then
I talked about this book in the 80s and
the Giuliani after 9/11 the
transformation I don't know if it's a
transformation but the difference now is
how it's it's just extraordinary anyway
that's another conversation when you
finish your next book on it how to put
the government back together after Trump
is that what you're after this after
Trump an agenda for reform
but this musters I say it's just a word
war about the book and just thought I'd
oh the whole experience of doing it was
so different for what you've been doing
and I mean satisfying frustrating it was
gratifying it's a good question I'm
still deliberating on that it took me
seven years to write the book in my old
age taking on a dozen new topics and
trying to master the history of the mob
the history of labor all these wiretap
things the Kennedy administration
hundreds of interviews my stepfather it
took a lot of mental and intellectual
effort so I'm glad it's over
the main thing I set out to do this book
was in large part atonement to Chucky
for what for basically being terrible
temper twenty years that's what I told
him
how I viewed it so I've gotten some
satisfaction out of the fact that the
FBI is acknowledged even though not
officially that he wasn't involved that
everyone who reads the book thinks that
the evidence that I brought to bear
shows that he wasn't involved that's
been gratifying to me another thing
that's been gratifying he was pleased
that you know he was he went through all
sorts of stages of grief about it but
yes he's now very very pleased and that
for me that's it was worth the seven
years he's deeply grateful for what I
did very appreciative and very proud of
the book and you know for people to
Chucky's the guy who's been given a bad
shake every turn he's got terrible luck
and he's never nice things have never
been said about him and for people and
the reviews and others to say what how
honorable he comes across on so many
dimensions what a great father he was
and and what an interesting character he
was it's very gratifying for him the
other thing I didn't expect so a big
theme in the book is about fathers and
sons forgiveness loyalty and this was
kind of an incidental theme for me I
kind of opened the book with that
because of my relationship with Chuckie
and it kind of comes up throughout the
book but I wasn't really self-aware too
much I've gotten so many emails from
people saying talking about Chuckie
forgiving me and me seeking his
forgiveness emails and letters really
more than a hundred people saying thank
you so much I don't have a great
relationship with my dad or my mom and
you've really helped me to try to take
this step that was very gratifying not
something I expected on the whole I'm
I'm pleased with the reception I'm glad
Chuckie likes it and I'm also glad it's
over with I'm glad that's a one thing
I'd also just know I just struck by was
you you had a little learning very
lightly I'd say and so it doesn't look
like it was much effort well it takes a
lot it takes a lot of effort to learn
something well enough yeah but in what
has the impression that well of course
Jekyll's knows all about Fourth
Amendment law you're a big shot harvard
law professor why wouldn't you know but
as you say that's of course not history
the mafia that's a key how it is your
mafia and also when you're being
contrarian and not simply buying the
established line on how far or something
like but for me what was very deftly
done which i think i know a little bit
of enough to appreciate this is the
weaving together i mean you're telling a
story about things that happened decades
ago how you discovered your small we're
all at the time and those things that
happened right seeing them as a kid in
effect how you then just went back and
discovered what had happened and being
rediscovered and is that we both you
know right educate yourself about it
right so it's a hard thing I think it's
a kind of literary matter not to sound
too fancy or anything and how to how to
do that narration and sort of to it and
you do it very well you don't do it and
sort of I mean you weave it together in
a way that's not confusing at all it's
always clear what whether you're talking
about yourself in 1975 or 2015 right but
you weave it together in a way that's
also skillful I thought you're you're
very kind for saying so I'm very
gratified by that because it was an
extremely complicated story I'm telling
a story about my relationship with
Chuckie Chucky's right stupid Hoffa
going through history - through time but
also
Chucky and I are in a dialogue it was
very hard to do I spent a lot of time
thinking about organizational structure
and I think it all ended up working
pretty well in the end but it took that
took a lot of work to - to get to that
point I'm glad you had that reaction
that I really did well thank you for
thank you so much we living it with me
and with us today and we look forward to
your next book on our next conversation
great next summer
HECO Smith thank you and thank you for
joining us on conversations